<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Legend of Poutini and Whaiapu</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-9" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Legend of Poutini and Whaiapu</h2>
			<section id="chapter-9-1" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="subtitle">The Discovery of New Zealand</h3>
				<p>Now pay attention to the cause of the contention which arose between Poutini and Whaiapu, which led them to emigrate to New Zealand. For a long time they both rested in the same place, and Hine-tū-a-hōanga, to whom the stone Whaiapu<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-15" id="noteref-15" epub:type="noteref">15</a> belonged, became excessively enraged with Ngāhue, and with his stone Poutini.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-16" id="noteref-16" epub:type="noteref">16</a> At last she drove Ngāhue out and forced him to leave the place, and Ngāhue departed and went to a strange land, taking his jade stone. When Hine-tū-a-hōanga saw that he was departing with his precious stone, she followed after them, and Ngāhoe arrived at Tūhua with his stone, and Hine-tū-a-hōanga arrived and landed there at the same time with him, and began to drive him away again. Then Ngāhue went to seek a place where his jade stones might remain in peace, and he found in the sea this island Aotearoa (the northern island of New Zealand), and he thought he would land there.</p>
				<p>Then he thought again, lest he and his enemy should be too close to one another, and should quarrel again, that it would be better for him to go further off with his jade stone, a very long way off. So he carried it off with him, and they coasted along, and at length arrived at Arahura (on the west coast of the middle island), and he made that an everlasting resting place for his jade stone; then he broke off a portion of his jade stone, and took it with him and returned, and as he coasted along he at length reached Wairere (believed to be upon the east coast of the northern island), and he visited Whangaparāoa and Tauranga, and from thence he returned direct to Hawaiki, and reported that he had discovered a new country which produced the moa and jade stone in abundance. He now manufactured sharp axes from his jade stone; two axes were made from it, Tutauru and Hauhauterangi. He manufactured some portions of one piece of it into images for neck ornaments, and some portions into ear ornaments; the name of one of these ear ornaments was Kaukaumatua, which was recently in the possession of Te Heuheu, and was only lost in 1846, when he was killed with so many of his tribe by a landslip. The axe Tutauru was only lately lost by Purahokura and his brother Reretai, who were descended from Tamaihutoroa. When Ngāhue, returning, arrived again in Hawaiki, he found them all engaged in war, and when they heard his description of the beauty of this country of Aotea, some of them determined to come here.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-9-2" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Construction of Canoes to Emigrate to New Zealand</h3>
				<p>They then felled a tōtara tree in Rarotonga, which lies on the other side of Hawaiki, that they might build the Arawa from it. The tree was felled, and thus the canoe was hewn out from it and finished. The names of the men who built this canoe were, Rātā, Wahieroa, Ngāhue, Parata, and some other skilful men, who helped to hew out the Arawa and to finish it.</p>
				<p>A chief of the name of Hoturoa, hearing that the Arawa was built, and wishing to accompany them, came to Tamatekapua and asked him to lend him his workmen to hew out some canoes for him too, and they went and built and finished the Tainui and some other canoes.</p>
				<p>The workmen above mentioned are those who built the canoes in which our forefathers crossed the ocean to this island, to Aotearoa. The names of the canoes were as follows: the Arawa was first completed, then Tainui, then Mātaatua, and Tākitumu, and Kurahaupō, and Tokomaru, and Matahourua. These are the names of the canoes in which our forefathers departed from Hawaiki, and crossed to this island. When they had lashed the topsides on to the Tainui, Rātā slew the son of Manaia, and hid his body in the chips and shavings of the canoes. The names of the axes with which they hewed out these canoes were Hauhauterangi, and Tutauru. Tutauru was the axe with which they cut off the head of Uenuku.</p>
				<p>All these axes were made from the block of green stone brought back by Ngāhue to Hawaiki, which was called “The fish of Ngāhue.” He had previously come to these islands from Hawaiki, when he was driven out from thence by Hine-tū-a-hōanga, whose fish or stone was Obsidian. From that cause Ngāhue came to these islands; the canoes which afterwards arrived here came in consequence of his discovery.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
