<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Children of Heaven and Earth</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Children of Heaven and Earth</h3>
				<p epub:type="subtitle" xml:lang="mi">Ko Ngā Tama A Rangi</p>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">Tradition Relating To The Origin Of The Human Race</p>
			</header>
			<p>Men had but one pair of primitive ancestors; they sprang from the vast heaven that exists above us, and from earth which lies beneath us. According to the traditions of our race, Rangi and Papa, or Heaven and Earth, were the source from which, in the beginning, all things originated. Darkness then rested upon the heaven and upon the earth, and they still both clave together, for they had not yet been rent apart; and the children they had begotten were ever thinking amongst themselves what might be the difference between darkness and light; they knew that beings had multiplied and increased, and yet light had never broken upon them, but it ever continued dark. Hence these sayings are found in our ancient religious services: “There was darkness from the first division of time, unto the tenth, to the hundredth, to the thousandth,” that is, for a vast space of time; and these divisions of times were considered as beings, and were each termed a Po; and on their account there was yet no world with its bright light, but darkness only for the beings which existed.</p>
			<p>At last the beings who had been begotten by Heaven and Earth, worn out by the continued darkness, consulted amongst themselves, saying, “Let us now determine what we should do with Rangi and Papa, whether it would be better to slay them or to rend them apart.” Then spoke Tūmatauenga, the fiercest of the children of Heaven and Earth, “It is well, let us slay them.”</p>
			<p>Then spake Tānemahuta, the father of forests and of all things that inhabit them, or that are constructed of trees, “Nay, not so. It is better to rend them apart, and to let the heaven stand far above us, and the earth lie beneath our feet. Let the sky become as a stranger to us, but the earth remain close to us as a nursing mother.”</p>
			<p>The brothers all consented to this proposal, with the exception of Tāwhirimātea, the father of winds and storms, and he, fearing that his kingdom was about to be overthrown, grieved greatly at the thought of his parents being torn apart. Five of the brothers willingly consented to the separation of their parents, but one of them would not consent to it.</p>
			<p>Hence, also, these sayings of old are found in our prayers, “Darkness, darkness, light, light, the seeking, the searching, in chaos, in chaos;” these signified the way in which the offspring of heaven and earth sought for some mode of dealing with their parents, so that human beings might increase and live.</p>
			<p>So, also, these sayings of old time, “The multitude, the length,” signified the multitude of the thoughts of the children of Heaven and Earth, and the length of time they considered whether they should slay their parents, that human beings might be called into existence; for it was in this manner that they talked and consulted amongst themselves.</p>
			<p>But at length their plans having been agreed on, lo,  Rongomātāne, the god and father of the cultivated food of man, rises up, that he may rend apart the heavens and the earth; he struggles, but he rends them not apart. Lo, next, Tangaroa, the god and father of fish and reptiles, rises up, that he may rend apart the heavens and the earth; he also struggles, but he rends them not apart. Lo, next, Haumia-tikitiki, the god and father of the food of man which springs without cultivation, rises up and struggles, but ineffectually. Lo, then, Tūmatauenga, the god and father of fierce human beings, rises up and struggles, but he, too, fails in his efforts. Then, at last, slowly uprises Tānemahuta, the god and father of forests, of birds, and of insects, and he struggles with his parents; in vain he strives to rend them apart with his hands and arms. Lo, he pauses; his head is now firmly planted on his mother the earth, his feet he raises up and rests against his father the skies, he strains his back and limbs with mighty effort. Now are rent apart Rangi and Papa, and with cries and groans of woe they shriek aloud, “Wherefore slay you thus your parents? Why commit you so dreadful a crime as to slay us, as to rend your parents apart?” But Tānemahuta pauses not, he regards not their shrieks and cries; far, far beneath him he presses down the earth; far, far above him he thrust up the sky.</p>
			<p>Hence these sayings of olden time, “It was the fierce thrusting of Tāne which tore the heaven from the earth, so that they were rent apart, and darkness was made manifest, and so was the light.”</p>
			<p>No sooner was heaven rent from earth than the multitude of human beings were discovered whom they had begotten, and who had hitherto lain concealed between the bodies of Rangi and Papa.</p>
			<p>Then, also, there arose in the breast of Tāwhirimātea, the god and father of winds and storms, a fierce desire to wage war with his brothers, because they had rent apart their common parents. He from the first had refused to consent to his mother being torn from her lord and children; it was his brothers alone that wished for this separation, and desired that Papatūānuku, or the Earth alone, should be left as a parent to them.</p>
			<p>The god of hurricanes and storms dreads also that the world should become too fair and beautiful, so he rises, follows his father to the realms above, and hurries to the sheltered hollows in the boundless skies; there he hides and clings, and nestling in this place of rest he consults long with his parent, and as the vast Heaven listens to the suggestions of Tāwhirimātea, thoughts and plans are formed in his breast, and Tāwhirimātea also understands what he should do. Then by himself and the vast Heaven were begotten his numerous brood, and they rapidly increased and grew. Tāwhirimātea despatches one of them to the westward, and one to the southward, and one to the eastward, and one to the northward; and he gives corresponding names to himself and to his progeny the mighty winds.</p>
			<p>He next sends forth fierce squalls, whirlwinds, dense clouds, massy clouds, dark clouds, gloomy thick clouds, fiery clouds, clouds which precede hurricanes, clouds of fiery black, clouds reflecting glowing red light, clouds wildly drifting from all quarters and wildly bursting, clouds of thunder storms, and clouds hurriedly flying. In the midst of these Tāwhirimātea himself sweeps wildly on. Alas! alas! then rages the fierce hurricane; and whilst Tānemahuta and his gigantic forests still stand, unconscious and unsuspecting, the blast of the breath of the mouth of Tāwhirimātea smites them, the gigantic trees are snapt off right in the middle; alas! alas! they are rent to atoms, dashed to the earth, with boughs and branches torn and scattered, and lying on the earth, trees and branches all alike left for the insect, for the grub, and for loathsome rottenness.</p>
			<p>From the forests and their inhabitants Tāwhirimātea next swoops down upon the seas, and lashes in his wrath the ocean. Ah! ah! waves steep as cliffs arise, whose summits are so lofty that to look from them would make the beholder giddy; these soon eddy in whirlpools, and Tangaroa, the god of the ocean, and father of all that dwell therein, flies affrighted through his seas; but before he fled, his children consulted together how they might secure their safety, for Tangaroa had begotten Punga, and he had begotten two children, Ikatere, the father of fish, and Tū-te-wehiwehi, or Tū-te-wanawana, the father of reptiles.</p>
			<p>When Tangaroa fled for safety to the ocean, then Tū-te-wehiwehi and Ikatere, and their children, disputed together as to what they should do to escape from the storms, and Tū-te-wehiwehi and his party cried aloud, “Let us fly inland;” but Ikatere and his party cried aloud, “Let us fly to the sea.” Some would not obey one order, some would not obey the other, and they escaped in two parties: the party of Tū-te-wehiwehi, or the reptiles, hid themselves ashore; the party of Puuga rushed to the sea. This is what, in our ancient religious services, is called the separation of Ta-whiri-ma-tea. Hence these traditions have been handed down:⁠—“Ikatere, the father of things which inhabit the water, cried aloud to Tū-te-wehiwehi, ‘Ho, ho, let us all escape to the sea.’</p>
			<p>“But Tū-te-wehiwehi shouted in answer, ‘Nay, nay, let us rather fly inland.’</p>
			<p>“Then Ikatere warned him, saying, ‘Fly inland, then; and the fate of you and your race will be, that when they catch you, before you are cooked, they will singe off your scales over a lighted wisp of dry fern.’</p>
			<p>“But Tū-te-wehiwehi answered him, saying, ‘Seek safety, then, in the sea; and the future fate of your race will be, that when they serve out little baskets of cooked vegetable food to each person, you will be laid upon the top of the food to give a relish to it.’</p>
			<p>“Then without delay these two races of beings separated. The fish fled in confusion to the sea, the reptiles sought safety in the forests and scrubs.”</p>
			<p>Tangaroa, enraged at some of his children deserting him, and, being sheltered by the god of the forests on dry land, has ever since waged war on his brother Tāne, who, in return, has waged war against him.</p>
			<p>Hence, Tāne supplies the offspring of his brother Tūmatauenga with canoes, with spears and with fishhooks made from his trees, and with nets woven from his fibrous plants, that they may destroy the offspring of Tangaroa; whilst Tangaroa, in return, swallows up the offspring of Tāne, overwhelming canoes with the surges of his sea, swallowing up the lands, trees, and houses that are swept off by floods, and ever wastes away, with his lapping waves, the shores that confine him, that the giants of the forests may be washed down and swept out into his boundless ocean, that he may then swallow up the insects, the young birds and the various animals which inhabit them⁠—all which things are recorded in the prayers which were offered to these gods.</p>
			<p>Tāwhirimātea next rushed on to attack his brothers  Rongomātāne and Haumia-tikitiki, the gods and progenitors of cultivated and uncultivated food; but Papa, to save these for her other children, caught them up, and hid them in a place of safety; and so well were these children of hers concealed by their mother Earth, that Tāwhirimātea sought for them in vain.</p>
			<p>Tāwhirimātea having thus vanquished all his other brothers, next rushed against Tūmatauenga, to try his strength against his; he exerted all his force against him, but he could neither shake him or prevail against him. What did Tūmatauenga care for his brother’s wrath? he was the only one of the whole party of brothers who had planned the destruction of their parents, and had shown himself brave and fierce in war; his brothers had yielded at once before the tremendous assaults of Tāwhirimātea and his progeny⁠—Tānemahuta and his offspring had been broken and torn in pieces⁠—Tangaroa and his children had fled to the depths of the ocean or the recesses of the shore⁠— Rongomātāne and Haumia-tikitiki had been hidden from him in the earth⁠—but Tūmatauenga, or man, still stood erect and unshaken upon the breast of his mother Earth; and now at length the hearts of Heaven and of the god of storms became tranquil, and their passions were assuaged.</p>
			<p>Tūmatauenga, or fierce man, having thus successfully resisted his brother, the god of hurricanes and storms, next took thought how he could turn upon his brothers and slay them, because they had not assisted him or fought bravely when Tāwhirimātea had attacked them to avenge the separation of their parents, and because they had left him alone to show his prowess in the fight. As yet death had no power over man. It was not until the birth of the children of Taranga and of Makeatutara, of Māuitaha, of Māuirota, of Māuipae, of Māuiwaho, and of Māui-tikitiki-o-Taranga, the demigod who tried to deceive Hine-nui-te-pō, that death had power over men. If that goddess had not been deceived by Māui-tikitiki, men would not have died, but would in that case have lived forever; it was from his deceiving Hine-nui-te-pō that death obtained power over mankind, and penetrated to every part of the earth.</p>
			<p>Tūmatauenga continued to reflect upon the cowardly manner in which his brothers had acted, in leaving him to show his courage alone, and he first sought some means of injuring Tānemahuta, because he had not come to aid him in his combat with Tāwhirimātea, and partly because he was aware that Tāne had had a numerous progeny, who were rapidly increasing, and might at last prove hostile to him, and injure him, so he began to collect leaves of the whanake tree, and twisted them into nooses, and when his work was ended, he went to the forest to put up his snares, and hung them up⁠—ha! ha! the children of Tāne fell before him, none of them could any longer fly or move in safety.</p>
			<p>Then he next determined to take revenge on his brother Tangaroa, who had also deserted him in the combat; so he sought for his offspring, and found them leaping or swimming in the water; then he cut many leaves from the flax plant, and netted nets with the flax, and dragged these, and hauled the children of Tangaroa ashore.</p>
			<p>After that, he determined also to be revenged upon his brothers  Rongomātāne and Haumia-tikitiki; he soon found them by their peculiar leaves, and he scraped into shape a wooden hoe, and plaited a basket, and dug in the earth and pulled up all kinds of plants with edible roots, and the plants which had been dug up withered in the sun.</p>
			<p>Thus Tūmatauenga devoured all his brothers, and consumed the whole of them, in revenge for their having deserted him and left him to fight alone against Tāwhirimātea and Rangi.</p>
			<p>When his brothers had all thus been overcome by Tu’, he assumed several names, namely, Tūkāriri, Tūkanguha, Tūkataua, Tū-whakaheke-tangata, Tū-mata-whāiti, and Tūmatauenga; he assumed one name for each of his attributes displayed in the victories over his brothers. Four of his brothers were entirely deposed by him, and became his food; but one of them, Tāwhirimātea, he could not vanquish or make common, by eating him for food, so he, the last born child of Heaven and Earth, was left as an enemy for man, and still, with a rage equal to that of man, this elder brother ever attacks him in storms and hurricanes, endeavouring to destroy him alike by sea and land.</p>
			<p>Now the meanings of these names of the children of the Heaven and Earth are as follows:⁠—</p>
			<p>Tangaroa signifies fish of every kind;  Rongomātāne signifies the sweet potato, and all vegetables cultivated as food; Haumia-tikitiki signifies fern root, and all kinds of food which grow wild; Tānemahuta signifies forests, the birds and insects which inhabit them, and all things fashioned from wood; Tāwhirimātea signifies winds and storms; and Tūmatauenga signifies man.</p>
			<p>Four of his brothers having, as before stated, been made common, or articles of food, by Tūmatauenga, he assigned for each of them fitting incantations, that they might be abundant, and that he might easily obtain them.</p>
			<p>Some incantations were proper to Tānemahuta, they were called Tāne.</p>
			<p>Some incantations were for Tangaroa, they were called Tangaroa.</p>
			<p>Some were for  Rongomātāne, they were called  Rongomātāne.</p>
			<p>Some were for Haumia-tikitiki, they were called Haumia.</p>
			<p>The reason that he sought these incantations was, that his brothers might be made common by him, and serve for his food. There were also incantations for Tāwhirimātea to cause favourable winds, and prayers to the vast Heaven for fair weather, as also for mother Earth that she might produce all things abundantly. But it was the great God that taught these prayers to man.</p>
			<p>There were also many prayers and incantations composed for man, suited to the different times and circumstances of his life⁠—prayers at the baptism of an infant; prayers for abundance of food, for wealth; prayers in illness; prayers to spirits, and for many other things.</p>
			<p>The bursting forth of the wrathful fury of Tāwhirimātea against his brothers, was the cause of the disappearance of a great part of the dry land; during that contest a great part of mother Earth was submerged. The names of those beings of ancient days who submerged so large a portion of the earth were⁠—Terrible-rain, Long-continued-rain, Fierce-hail-storms, and their progeny were, Mist, Heavy dew, and Light dew, and these together submerged the greater part of the earth, so that only a small portion of dry land projected above the sea.</p>
			<p>From that time clear light increased upon the earth, and all the beings which were hidden between Rangi and Papa before they were separated, now multiplied upon the earth. The first beings begotten by Rangi and Papa were not like human beings; but Tūmatauenga bore the likeness of a man, as did all his brothers, as also did a Po, a Ao, a Kore, te Kimihanga and Runuku, and thus it continued until the times of Ngāinui and his generation, and of Whiro-te-tupua and his generation, and of Tiki-tawhito-ariki and his generation, and it has so continued to this day.</p>
			<p>The children of Tūmatauenga were begotten on this earth, and they increased, and continued to multiply, until we reach at last the generation of Māuitaha, and of his brothers Māuiroto, Māuiwaho, Māuipae, and Māui-tikitiki-o-Taranga.</p>
			<p>Up to this time the vast Heaven has still ever remained separated from his spouse the Earth. Yet their mutual love still continues⁠—the soft warm sighs of her loving bosom still ever rise up to him, ascending from the woody mountains and valleys, and men call these mists; and the vast Heaven, as he mourns through the long nights his separation from his beloved, drops frequent tears upon her bosom, and men seeing these, term them dewdrops.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
